in july 2019 a very special item was
sold at an auction in rhode island
special in that it was used over a
hundred years ago to save a group of
titanic passengers but what could it be
one of the lifeboats a piece of the
rescue ship no it was a mere cane a
black walking stick with an amber
colored tip and built in life how
exactly did a cane help save lives let
us journey back in time to uncover the
answers in the spring of 1912 55
year-old
Ella white was traveling around Europe
with her good friend Marie grace young a
36 year old piano teacher different
things can happen while you're out on an
adventure
things like injuring your foot at least
this is what happened to white at some
point during her travels abroad we'll
never know what it was exactly
but either way she had to get herself a
walking aid she decided to get a fancy
model with a battery illuminated crown a
decision that would save her life later
but let's not get ahead of ourselves
when their European vacation was over
the wealthy white and young got
themselves first-class tickets for RMS
Titanic and headed home to New York on
April 10th 1912 white was also traveling
with a maid a servant and some chickens
she and Young had purchased in France
little did the women know they wouldn't
arrive in New York on the same ship just
days later life in first-class of the
most famous ship in history was a luxury
but it came at a price all right ladies
and gentlemen among them some of the
richest people in the world paid up to
fifty thousand dollars by today's rate
for their tickets they got access to the
finest living conditions and onboard
entertainment they dined to the
beautiful compositions of a live
orchestra in a room filled with gorgeous
furniture and decor they played chess
and backgammon socializing with their
wealthy friends and acquaintances they
went to the gym the swimming pool and
squash courts ah seems none of them had
a worry in the world
Ella white however didn't take advantage
of all those enviable amenity
she preferred the company of her close
friend in one of the 39 private suites
at the top of the ship basically the
first time she left their suite was the
fateful night of April 14th imagine you
have all these rich well-dressed
socialites businesspeople and powerful
names there relaxing laughing and
enjoying the finer things in life
then within the blink of an eye all that
fun and carefree relaxation comes to a
screeching or perhaps smashing halt yes
April 14th was the very night the
unsinkable ship crashed into an iceberg
at 11:40 p.m. in the freezing waters of
the North Atlantic
she'd be underwater in 2 hours and 40
minutes when interviewed about it later
Ella white said she personally didn't
realize there was a need for all that
rush and evacuation she only described
the sensation of the ship striking the
iceberg as a slight tremor at that
moment it didn't seem scary at all
however just like the other passengers
she wanted to know what was going on so
together with her little personal crew
she left the comfort of her luxurious
suite and came to the upper deck a crowd
had already gathered there waiting for
explanations and instructions it was
also the place where all of the 20
lifeboats on board were located there
could have been more but then the deck
would have been too cluttered at least
that's what the ship's owners thought it
would be a grave mistake given the
horrendous shortage of boats for fleeing
passengers just like white not so many
people actually believed the slight
tremor could possibly be disastrous
moments later Captain Edward Smith
announced it was time to put on life
jackets and get into the lifeboats but
there was still no panic yet either
confident it was no big deal or trying
to cheer up the passengers some crew
members warned them not to lose their
passes so that they could show them when
they got back on board the ship
naturally people believed that and were
even more positive it was a minor
technical problem they got into the
lifeboats casually making plans for what
they do together once this unexpected
inconvenience was over with
as you know none of them came back to
the ship
she'd be bubbling to the bottom of the
Atlantic soon the crew started launching
the lifeboats at 12:25 a.m. it's at this
time that the Carpathia gets the
distress call and heads toward the
Titanic the first boat was in the water
at 12:40 a.m. lifeboat number eight
carrying miss white her maid and Miss
young were among the first to set off
White's male servant couldn't join them
of course women and children took
priority passengers from 2nd and 3rd
class didn't even know how to get to the
lifeboats on the upper deck perhaps a
drill would have prevented that when was
scheduled for that very morning on April
14th but it never happened by 2:00 a.m.
every lifeboat had been loaded and
launched there were still more than 1500
people left on the ship they now needed
to fend for themselves and it wouldn't
go well a mere 20 minutes later and the
Titanic would be no more as for those
lucky ones who managed to board a
lifeboat each group seemed to have its
heroes whether they were helping row the
boat or calming everyone down each role
mattered as much as the other but one
job was crucial someone needed to light
the way for lifeboat number 8 Ella white
would be the one to step up and take on
that role
the survivors realized that the
lifeboats lamps weren't strong enough
for that function at that moment Ella
white remembered her cane that very one
with a fancy built-in flashlight that
would go for auction over a hundred
years later
so the 27 survivors in lifeboat number
eight now needed to row for their lives
remember there was an enormous ship
going underwater and sucking anything
nearby down with it
Ms white with her illuminated walking
stick became their signal woman it was
dark
bitterly cold and the water surrounding
them were filled with debris but they
kept going not knowing how far help was
from them then tired and freezing cold
the lifeboats passengers saw a light
somewhere in the
since could it be the rescue light of
rms carpathia given the conditions they
didn't even know if they were moving
towards it or further away Ella white
kept waving that cane like the only
light of hope they still had after 45
minutes of going in what might have been
the wrong direction lifeboat number 8
decided to turn around to see if they
could save more people after all their
boat being one of the first ones
launched had only 27 people in it yet it
could easily hold two times more it was
a heroic decision indeed
as their signal woman was lighting the
way back to Titanic they were watching
the dream go underwater along with all
the luxuries still stored inside all
those brand-new intricately decorated
rooms lost valuables they belong to the
sea now it's hard to say what was going
through these brave people's minds fear
disappointment realizing how small and
powerless humans still are compared to
the elements probably all of the above
plus some by the time they got back to
the ship there was no longer a ship to
go back to now the passengers had to
worry about their own survival as the
North Atlantic wasn't exactly the safest
place to be Ella white continued her
signalling job to indicate their
presence to the rescue team they were
only picked up at 7:30 in the morning of
April 15th every single passenger and
crew member aboard lifeboat eight
survived the brave lady who lit the way
for the lifeboat would live to the age
of 85 passing in 1942 the unique cane
stayed in the family and it was passed
from generation to generation
the person who eventually consigned it
was Brad Williams his grandmother was
White's niece he received the stick from
his mother for years it was kept in his
umbrella stand among 35 other canes from
his collection he said he decided that
this one needed a better home where it
would be honored experts thought the
cane would sell for somewhere between
300 and 500 thousand dollars after all
it was still in perfect condition
not to mention the incredible history
yet it's sold for just sixty two
thousand five hundred dollars a lot for
a stick sure but it's nothing compared
to another Titanic artifact a violin
that the bandleader played during the
sinking that sold for about 1.7 million
dollars
some family members were against the
sale that fact might explain the
nervousness of prospective buyers and
the rather low final price for the cane
let's hope the lucky UK buyer will give
this treasured artifact the careful
treatment it deserves
[Music]